# Differential Effects of Aging on Exploration in Economic Decision Making

This project was completed for my Master's in Psychology at the University of Arizona. I handled data collection, analysis, and drafting of the manuscript. This project was conducted under the mentorship of Dr. Robert C. Wilson in the Neuroscience of Reinforcement Learning and Decision Making Lab at the University of Arizona.

## Project Summary

Deciding whether to explore unknown options or exploit well-known opportunities is a ubiquitous part of our everyday lives. The strategies used during these explore-exploit decisions have been well-characterized in young adults, but have been largely overlooked in older adults. To understand how aging affects explore-exploit decision making we had a sample of 43 older adults (ages 65-74) and 34 young adults (ages 18-25) complete a gambling task that manipulated reward, information, and the decision horizon, (or the utility that the information holds for future rewards). Directed exploration, or horizon-dependent information-seeking, showed no difference between the age groups despite older adults showing lower information-seeking overall. Random exploration, or horizon-dependent behavioral variability, did show a reduction in older adults compared to young adults despite no difference in decision noise overall. Taken together, these findings show how different strategies for exploration are differentially affected by aging, lending evidence to the idea that these two forms of exploration rely on distinct cognitive and neural mechanisms.

## The Horizon Task

Throughout our lives, we often face decisions in which we must trade off the relative benefits of exploring options that are unknown with exploiting options we know well. For example, when dining at a favorite Singapore-style restaurant, should we explore the unknown fish head curry, or exploit the rice noodles we know and love? As we age, such explore-exploit choices take on increasing importance as we decide how to invest savings in retirement (e.g. explore a new balance of stocks and bonds or exploit the balance we've used so far?), or how to treat a chronic disease (e.g. explore new treatments with unknown side effects, or exploit known treatments we've used for years?). 

Explore-exploit decision making has received considerable attention in recent years and the behavior of young people has been extensively studied. (Meyer & Shi, 1995; Banks, Olson, & Porter, 1997; Daw et al. 2006; Frank et al., 2009; Steyvers, Lee, & Wagenmakers, 2009; Lee, et al., 2011; Payzan-LeNestour & Bossaerts, 2012; Zhang & Yu, 2013; Wilson et al. 2014; Frank, 2009; Gershman 2018; Somerville 2017), see (Schulz and Gershman 2019; Wilson et al. 2020 For review). This work suggests that people use two distinct strategies to solve the explore-exploit dilemma: directed exploration and random exploration.

In directed exploration, choices are driven by an explicit bias for information. Returning to the restaurant example, one way to decide between known rice noodles and unknown fish head curry is to assign an expected utility to each option, corresponding to how enjoyable we think each meal will be. Thus, a known rice noodle dish might get a utility value of 65 out of 100, indicating it has been good but not great in the past, while an unknown curry might get 50, based on our past experience with various curries. In this context, directed exploration works by adding an "information bonus,"(IB) to the expected value of each option according to the information provided by choosing that option. Thus the known rice noodles receive no information bonus, IB(noodles) = 0, because eating them tells us nothing new; while the unknown fish head curry receives a large information bonus, IB(curry) = 20, because eating it is informative and we will learn how good the curry is. This "information bonus" makes us more likely to explore the curry, even if, on average, it is likely to be worse than the rice noodles.

In random exploration, choices are driven by seemingly "random" behavioral variability or in this context "decision noise." In contrast to directed exploration, random exploration adds this random decision noise to the expected values of both options. This noise tends to randomize the choice, making us more likely to explore low value options by chance. In the restaurant, this would be choosing the curry, not because it is something unknown or because it is something you really enjoy, but simply due to random chance.

While humans should use directed and random exploration in theory, a number of psychological factors complicate the study of explore-exploit decisions in practice. For directed exploration, a desire for information is often opposed by an aversion to uncertainty, whereby people tend to avoid choosing options whose outcomes they know less about. In explore-exploit tasks, this uncertainty mostly comes in the form of ambiguity, where the uncertainty associated with exploration reflects a lack of knowledge (Ellsberg, 1961, Camerer & Weber, 1992). The uncertainty can also come in the form of risk (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979), where uncertainty associated with exploration reflects real variability in the world that no amount of knowledge can reduce, such as when flipping a coin. For random exploration, decision noise used for exploration is often indistinguishable from baseline behavioral variability driven by boredom, disengagement from the task, or simply making mistakes. Thus, to measure directed and random exploration correctly, it is critical to account for baseline levels of uncertainty (i.e. risk and ambiguity) preference and behavioral variability.

![The Horizon Task. (A) Timeline of a horizon 6 game. The first four trials in each game are forced trials. In these trials a green box appears inside the bandit participants are required to choose. Once a bandit is chosen, the reward is displayed and the next trial begins. After the four forced-choice trials, two green boxes appear indicating a free choice between the two bandits. Participants make free choices for the rest of the game. (B ,C) The four forced-choice trials setup one of two information conditions based on whether participants have played the two options an unequal (i.e. one option once and the other three times, [1 3] condition, B) or equal (i.e. both options twice, [2 2] condition, C) number of times. Combined with the two horizon conditions (horizon 1 vs horizon 6) this gives four different conditions for the first free choice trial. (D) The frequency with which participants choose the more informative option in the unequal condition, p(high info) offers a measure of uncertainty preference, in horizon 1, and directed exploration, in the change in p(high info) between horizon 1 and 6. (E) The frequency with which participants choose the low mean reward option, p(low mean), offers a measure of baseline behavioral variability, in horizon 1, and random exploration, in the change in p(low mean) between horizon 1 and horizon 6.](https://lh6.googleusercontent.com/_KLww-nod6E7Iw5UO8tO3BOMxF678Z6SDqt81sD9EMxc9EJml4w_fyKciDOlG2PyJLv9QU03UUYrv_zOo5Twd04cFwpFb0Xkte9FLekkMY5C71Y23mh4iPC03Lh7VLF5KRjtjeIW)

## Sample Figures and Analyses

### Age differences in overall accuracy and response time in the Horizon Task

![Accuracy and response time in the Horizon Task. (A) Accuracy, how often participants chose the bandit with the objectively correct option, i.e. the option with higher generative mean, for the different horizon conditions over the course of each game for older and younger adults. Older adults were more accurate overall, but younger adults were more accurate on the last trial of each game (i.e. free trial 1 for horizon 1 games, free trial 6 for horizon 6 games). On the first free-choice trial, all participants were more accurate in horizon 1 than horizon 6. (B, C) Response times as a function of trial number for horizon 1 (B) and horizon 6 (C) games. For both age groups, participants are fastest for the four forced choice trials, and slowest for the first free choice trial, where they make their first decision. After the first free choice trial, reaction times decrease over the course of the horizon 6 games as participants presumably hone in on the option they wish to exploit.](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/s9quOT2fpAOSuJ_dxDWtSKt2-FfzW49DseA7pJUfVFid1XKjx6Dkm643x-37MKy1aZRrdMIoFK8FfiUSgO_7Lf6aX1IXhF4v0avdyb2GwWK1zE4gDmz43SHaSqYzdoXinB8nJe_V)

### Older adults exhibit increased uncertainty aversion and decreased random exploration 

![Performance on the first free-choice trial in the Horizon Task. (A) Information seeking, quantified by p(high info) in the [1 3] condition, increases with horizon in both age groups, indicating that both groups use directed exploration. However, information seeking is reduced overall in older adults, suggesting more uncertainty aversion in this group. (B) Behavioral variability, quantified by p(low mean) in the [2 2] condition, increases with horizon in both age groups, indicating that both groups use random exploration. However, the change in variability with horizon is smaller for older adults, suggesting less random exploration in this group. (C)Scatter plot showing individual differences in information seeking in the two horizon conditions. Each point represents a single participant, with points above the dotted equality line (74% older adults, 62% younger adults) indicating this participant showed more information seeking in horizon 6 than horizon 1, i.e. directed exploration. Notably, a large fraction of older adults (34%), but only a smaller fraction of younger adults (3%), cluster in the bottom left of the plot, consistent with a type of "extreme ambiguity aversion." (D) Scatter plot showing individual differences in behavioral variability in the two horizon conditions. Points above the dotted equality line (72% older adults, 88% younger adults) indicate participants who increase their variability in horizon 6, i.e. exhibit random exploration.](https://lh5.googleusercontent.com/Aw4nY4vuHJ7osE545nKVMa8bXFFUM7185gdm73Qs8fNQxbZsEOdJM0JTeL7jwvSOTK6J4R9w13PNDJnbRaapujismcRY0jVXYxhDX2YMXwjbNlrej3oeBS36yBSyy1Ntwttb-AzE)

## File List

-   AgingBehVarPattern.R: The analysis script, not this analysis uses the here package and for these analyses you need to keep the data files in the same folder as this file.

-   AgingInconsistent.csv: Overall data structure for the main analyses

-   OldAcc.csv: Data parsed to older participants who played the Horizon Task accurately.

-   OldNoAcc.csv: Data parsed to older participants who played the Horizon Task regardless of accuracy. Used for supplementary analyses.

-   YoungIndAcc.csv: Data parsed to younger participants who played the Horizon Task accurately.

-   YoungNoAcc.csv: Data parsed to younger participants who played the Horizon Task regardless of accuracy. Used for supplementary analyses.

## Authors on Manuscript

Jack-Morgan Mizell, Siyu Wang, Alec Frisvold, Lily Alvarado, Alex Farrell-Skupny, Waitsang Keung, Mark H. Sundman, Mary-Kathryn Franchetti, Ying-hui Chou, Gene E. Alexander and Robert C. Wilson
